SEE THE CHILD. He is pale and thin, he wears a thin and ragged linen shirt.
 He stokes the scullery fire. Outside lie dark turned fields with rags of snow
 and darker woods beyond that harbor yet a few last wolves. His folk are
 known for hewers of wood and drawers of water but in truth his father has
 been a schoolmaster. He lies in drink, he quotes from poets whose names
 are now lost. The boy crouches by the fire and watches him.
 Night of your birth. Thirty-three. The Leonids they were called. God how
 the stars did fall. I looked for blackness, holes in the heavens. The Dipper
 stove.
 The mother dead these fourteen years did incubate in her own bosom the
 creature who would carry her off. The father never speaks her name, the
 child does not know it. He has a sister in this world that he will not see
 again. He watches, pale and unwashed. He can neither read nor write and in
 him broods already a taste for mindless violence. All history present in that
 visage, the child the father of the man.
 At fourteen he runs away. He will not see again the freezing kitchenhouse
 in the predawn dark. The firewood, the washpots. He wanders west as far as
 Memphis, a solitary migrant upon that flat and pastoral landscape. Blacks in
 the fields, lank and stooped, their fingers spiderlike among the bolls of
 cotton. A shadowed agony in the garden. Against the sun’s declining figures
 moving in the slower dusk across a paper skyline. A lone dark husbandman
 pursuing mule and harrow down the rain-blown bottomland toward night.
A year later he is in Saint Louis. He is taken on for New Orleans aboard a
 flatboat. Forty-two days on the river. At night the steamboats hoot and
 trudge past through the black waters all alight like cities adrift. They break
 up the float and sell the lumber and he walks in the streets and hears
 tongues he has not heard before. He lives in a room above a courtyard
 behind a tavern and he comes down at night like some fairybook beast to
 fight with the sailors. He is not big but he has big wrists, big hands. His
 shoulders are set close. The child’s face is curiously untouched behind the
 scars, the eyes oddly innocent. They fight with fists, with feet, with bottles
 or knives. All races, all breeds. Men whose speech sounds like the grunting
 of apes. Men from lands so far and queer that standing over them where
 they lie bleeding in the mud he feels mankind itself vindicated.
 On a certain night a Maltese boatswain shoots him in the back with a
 small pistol. Swinging to deal with the man he is shot again just below the
 heart. The man flees and he leans against the bar with the blood running out
 of his shirt. The others look away. After a while he sits on the floor.
 He lies in a cot in the room upstairs for two weeks while the
 tavernkeeper’s wife attends him. She brings his meals, she carries out his
 slops. A hardlooking woman with a wiry body like a man’s. By the time he
 is mended he has no money to pay her and he leaves in the night and sleeps
 on the riverbank until  he can find a boat that will take him on. The boat is
 going to Texas.
 Only now is the child finally divested of all that he has been. His origins
 are become remote as is his destiny and not again in all the world’s turning
 will there be terrains so wild and barbarous to try whether the stuff of
 creation may be shaped to man’s will or whether his own heart is not
 another kind of clay. The passengers are a diffident lot. They cage their eyes
 and no man asks another what it is that brings him here. He sleeps on the
 deck, a pilgrim among others. He watches the dim shore rise and fall. Gray
 seabirds gawking. Flights of pelicans coastwise above the gray swells.
 They disembark aboard a lighter, settlers with their chattels, all studying
 the low coastline, the thin bight of sand and scrub pine swimming in the
 haze.
 He walks through the narrow streets of the port. The air smells of salt and
 newsawn lumber. At night whores call to him from the dark like souls in
 want. A week and he is on the move again, a few dollars in his purse that
 he’s earned, walking the sand roads of the southern night alone, his hands
 balled in the cotton pockets of his cheap coat. Earthen causeways across the
 marshland. Egrets in their rookeries white as candles among the moss. The
 wind has a raw edge to it and leaves lope by the roadside and skelter on in
 the night fields. He moves north through small settlements and farms,
 working for day wages and found. He sees a parricide hanged in a
 crossroads hamlet and the man’s friends run forward and pull his legs and
 he hangs dead from his rope while urine darkens his trousers.
 He works in a sawmill, he works in a diphtheria pesthouse. He takes as
 pay from a farmer an aged mule and aback this animal in the spring of the
 year eighteen and forty-nine he rides up through the latterday republic of
 Fredonia into the town of Nacogdoches
